Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
cardiac muscle and the cardiac cycle. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us turn to the cardiovascular system. Describe the structure of cardiac muscle.
Cardiac muscle, the myocardium, shares features with skeletal muscle but has
distinctive properties suiting it to continuous, rhythmic, involuntary contraction.
Like skeletal muscle it is striated,
containing the same arrangement of actin and myosin in sarcomeres,
so it contracts by the same sliding-filament mechanism.
But its cells are different: each is a single, branched,
usually single-nucleate cell, far smaller than a skeletal fibre,
and the cells are joined end to end by specialised junctions,
the intercalated discs.
These discs contain two important structures: desmosomes,
which mechanically anchor the cells together so that force is transmitted,
and gap junctions, which electrically couple them,
allowing the action potential to spread directly from cell to cell.
The myocardium therefore behaves as a functional syncytium,
contracting as a coordinated unit. The cells are exceptionally rich in
mitochondria, reflecting the heart's continuous aerobic work.
So cardiac muscle is striated, contracting like skeletal muscle by sliding
filaments, but composed of single-nucleate branched cells joined by intercalated
discs whose desmosomes transmit force and gap junctions electrically couple the
cells into a functional syncytium, and rich in mitochondria for continuous aerobic
work — a structure adapted to lifelong rhythmic contraction.
Describe the cardiac action potential of the ventricular myocyte.
The ventricular action potential differs strikingly from that of nerve and skeletal
muscle, chiefly in its long duration, and is described in phases.
Phase zero is the rapid upstroke: a fast depolarisation driven by the opening of
voltage-gated sodium channels, sodium rushing in.
Phase one is a brief partial repolarisation as the sodium channels inactivate and a
transient potassium current flows.
Phase two is the plateau, the characteristic feature:
the membrane remains depolarised for a few hundred milliseconds because an inward
calcium current, through voltage-gated calcium channels,
balances the outward potassium current; this calcium is central to contraction.
Phase three is repolarisation, as the calcium channels close and potassium efflux
predominates, returning the membrane to rest.
Phase four is the stable resting potential of the working myocyte.
The whole action potential lasts some two to three hundred milliseconds.
So the ventricular action potential has a fast sodium-driven upstroke,
a brief partial repolarisation, a prolonged calcium-dependent plateau,
repolarisation by potassium efflux,
and a stable resting phase — the calcium plateau being the distinctive feature,
prolonging the action potential and admitting the calcium for contraction.
Why is the long plateau and refractory period of cardiac muscle important?
The prolonged action potential, and the correspondingly long refractory period that
accompanies it, are of fundamental importance to the heart's function,
distinguishing cardiac from skeletal muscle.
Because the action potential lasts almost as long as the contraction itself,
the muscle remains refractory — unable to be re-excited — for nearly the whole
duration of the contraction.
The crucial consequence is that cardiac muscle cannot be tetanised:
a second stimulus during the contraction falls in the refractory period and cannot
trigger a summed, sustained contraction as it would in skeletal muscle.
This is essential, because a heart that could tetanise would contract continuously
and fail to relax, fill and pump.
The long refractory period therefore ensures that each contraction is followed by
relaxation and filling before the next, allowing rhythmic, effective pumping;
it also protects against premature re-excitation and helps prevent some arrhythmias.
So the long plateau and refractory period of cardiac muscle,
lasting almost the whole contraction, prevent tetany,
ensuring that each contraction is separated by relaxation and filling — essential
to rhythmic pumping and protective against premature re-excitation,
a key functional difference from skeletal muscle.
Describe excitation-contraction coupling in cardiac muscle.
Cardiac excitation-contraction coupling links the action potential to contraction
through calcium, by the mechanism of calcium-induced calcium release,
which differs from skeletal muscle in depending on extracellular calcium.
As the action potential, and particularly its plateau,
depolarises the membrane and the T-tubules,
voltage-gated calcium channels — the L-type, or dihydropyridine, channels — open,
and a quantity of calcium enters the cell from outside.
This entering calcium is the trigger:
it acts on the ryanodine receptors of the sarcoplasmic reticulum,
causing them to open and release a much larger store of calcium from within —
calcium-induced calcium release.
The combined rise in cytoplasmic calcium binds troponin,
moving tropomyosin to expose actin,
and the cross-bridge cycle proceeds as in skeletal muscle, producing contraction.
Relaxation follows as calcium is pumped back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum and
extruded from the cell.
So cardiac excitation-contraction coupling works by calcium-induced calcium
release: calcium entering during the plateau triggers a larger release from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum, the combined calcium driving contraction — the dependence
on extracellular calcium meaning that the force is gradable and sensitive to
calcium and to drugs affecting these channels.
Describe the phases of the cardiac cycle.
The cardiac cycle is the sequence of events in one heartbeat, divided into systole,
the contraction and ejection, and diastole, the relaxation and filling,
and described as a series of phases defined by the opening and closing of the
valves.
Beginning with the ventricle filled at end-diastole: first,
isovolumetric contraction — the ventricle begins to contract, pressure rises,
the atrioventricular valves close, but all valves are shut,
so the volume is constant while pressure builds.
Second, ejection — when ventricular pressure exceeds that in the aorta,
the aortic valve opens and blood is ejected, rapidly then more slowly.
Third, isovolumetric relaxation — the ventricle relaxes, pressure falls,
the aortic valve closes, and again all valves are shut.
Fourth, filling — when ventricular pressure falls below atrial,
the atrioventricular valve opens and the ventricle fills, rapidly at first,
then slowly, completed by atrial contraction.
So the cardiac cycle comprises isovolumetric contraction, ejection,
isovolumetric relaxation and filling,
defined by valve events — systole being contraction and ejection,
diastole relaxation and filling — an ordered sequence of pressure and volume
changes that constitutes each heartbeat.
Relate the pressure changes, valve events and heart sounds through the cycle.
The pressures in the chambers and great vessels change through the cycle,
driving the valve movements and generating the heart sounds,
conventionally shown together on the Wiggers diagram.
As the ventricle contracts in isovolumetric contraction,
its pressure rapidly exceeds the atrial pressure,
closing the atrioventricular valve — the mitral and tricuspid — and this closure
produces the first heart sound.
As ventricular pressure rises above aortic pressure,
the aortic valve opens and ejection occurs,
the ventricular and aortic pressures rising and falling together.
When the ventricle relaxes and its pressure falls below the aortic,
the aortic valve closes, producing the second heart sound,
marked on the aortic trace by a small notch, the dicrotic notch.
During filling, the venous and atrial pressures show their characteristic waves.
So through the cycle, ventricular contraction raises pressure to close the
atrioventricular valves — the first heart sound — then opens the aortic valve for
ejection; relaxation lets pressure fall to close the aortic valve — the second
heart sound and dicrotic notch; the coordinated pressure changes driving the valves
and generating the sounds, the basis of cardiac auscultation.
Describe the ventricular pressure-volume loop.
The pressure-volume loop is a powerful way of representing the cardiac cycle of one
ventricle, plotting the ventricular pressure on the vertical axis against the
ventricular volume on the horizontal axis through one beat,
tracing a loop traversed anticlockwise.
Starting at the end of filling, at the end-diastolic volume and a low pressure:
first, isovolumetric contraction is a vertical line upward — pressure rising at
constant volume — until the aortic valve opens.
Then ejection is the upper portion moving leftward — volume falling as blood is
ejected — down to the end-systolic volume when the aortic valve closes.
Then isovolumetric relaxation is a vertical line downward — pressure falling at
constant volume — until the mitral valve opens.
Then filling is the lower portion moving rightward — volume rising — back to the
start. The width of the loop is the stroke volume,
the difference between the end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes.
So the pressure-volume loop traces, anticlockwise, isovolumetric contraction,
ejection, isovolumetric relaxation and filling, its width being the stroke volume;
a representation from which preload, afterload,
contractility and the work of the ventricle can all be read — a central tool in
cardiovascular physiology.
How can preload, afterload and contractility be seen on the pressure-volume loop?
The pressure-volume loop elegantly displays the three determinants of stroke
volume, because changes in each alter the loop characteristically.
Preload, the end-diastolic volume, is the point at the bottom right where filling
ends and contraction begins; increasing preload moves this point rightward,
widening the loop and increasing the stroke volume — a graphical expression of
Starling's law.
Afterload, the pressure against which the ventricle ejects,
is reflected in the pressure at which the aortic valve opens;
increasing afterload raises this pressure,
so ejection begins later and the ventricle empties less,
increasing the end-systolic volume and reducing the stroke volume.
Contractility is shown by the end-systolic pressure-volume relationship,
the line joining the end-systolic points over varying conditions;
an increase in contractility steepens this line,
so the ventricle empties more completely to a smaller end-systolic volume,
increasing the stroke volume.
So on the loop, preload is the end-diastolic volume at the lower right,
afterload the pressure at which ejection begins,
and contractility the slope of the end-systolic pressure-volume relationship;
each can be altered independently and read from the loop — making it the ideal
framework for understanding the control of stroke volume.
What is the relevance of cardiac muscle physiology to anaesthesia?
Cardiac muscle physiology is central to anaesthesia because anaesthetic drugs and
the perioperative state profoundly affect the heart's function.
Most anaesthetic agents depress myocardial contractility to some degree — the
volatile agents and propofol in particular — reducing the slope of the end-systolic
pressure-volume relationship and so the stroke volume and cardiac output,
an effect exaggerated in the diseased heart and important to anticipate.
The agents and the autonomic changes also affect rate and rhythm.
The dependence of cardiac contraction on extracellular calcium and on the calcium
channels explains the effects of calcium and of calcium-channel-blocking drugs.
The myocardium's high, continuous oxygen demand makes it vulnerable to ischaemia
when supply falls or demand rises, a major perioperative concern.
So cardiac muscle physiology is highly relevant to anaesthesia:
anaesthetic agents depress contractility, reducing cardiac output;
the calcium-dependence of contraction underlies the effects of calcium and its
blockers; and the myocardium's high oxygen demand makes it vulnerable to
perioperative ischaemia — making the understanding and support of cardiac function
a constant anaesthetic task.
Pull it together: how does the structure and electrophysiology of cardiac muscle
serve its pumping function?
I would draw it together around the principle that every feature of cardiac muscle
is adapted to its task of lifelong, rhythmic, effective pumping.
Its striated actin-myosin apparatus generates force by sliding filaments,
as in skeletal muscle, but its single-nucleate cells,
coupled by intercalated discs into a functional syncytium,
ensure that excitation spreads cell to cell so the chambers contract as coordinated
units.
Its action potential, with the long calcium-dependent plateau,
both admits the calcium that triggers contraction by calcium-induced calcium
release and produces the long refractory period that prevents tetany,
ensuring relaxation and filling between beats.
The cardiac cycle of contraction and relaxation,
driven by these pressure changes and the valves, ejects the stroke volume,
regulated by preload, afterload and contractility as seen on the pressure-volume
loop. Its mitochondrial richness sustains the continuous work.
So the structure and electrophysiology of cardiac muscle serve its pumping
function: the syncytial, striated architecture for coordinated forceful
contraction, the calcium-plateau action potential for excitation-contraction
coupling and the prevention of tetany,
and the regulated cardiac cycle for effective ejection — an integrated design for
the lifelong pump.
Describe the metabolism and oxygen supply of the heart.
The heart is a continuously working muscle with a high and unremitting energy
demand, and its metabolism and oxygen supply are adapted to this,
with important consequences for its vulnerability.
The myocardium is almost entirely aerobic, rich in mitochondria,
and generates its adenosine triphosphate by oxidative phosphorylation;
it is metabolically flexible, using fatty acids as its main fuel at rest,
but also glucose, lactate and ketones,
switching according to availability — using more lactate in exercise and more
glucose in ischaemia.
Because it relies on aerobic metabolism and extracts oxygen very efficiently even
at rest — extracting some seventy per cent of the oxygen delivered,
far more than most tissues — it has little extraction reserve,
so any increase in demand must be met chiefly by increasing coronary blood flow.
The coronary supply is therefore critical,
and most of the left ventricular flow occurs in diastole,
when the muscle is relaxed.
So the heart is an aerobic, mitochondria-rich muscle using mainly fatty acids but
flexibly switching fuels, extracting oxygen near-maximally at rest so that it has
little extraction reserve and depends on increasing coronary flow — chiefly
diastolic — to meet demand; this dependence underlying its vulnerability to
ischaemia when supply falls or demand rises.
Describe the coronary circulation and the determinants of myocardial oxygen supply
and demand.
The coronary circulation supplies the myocardium,
and the balance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand is central to cardiac
function and to ischaemia. The supply depends on the coronary blood flow and the
oxygen content of the blood.
The coronary flow is unusual in its timing:
because the contracting left ventricle compresses its own vessels during systole,
most of the left ventricular coronary flow occurs during diastole,
so it depends on the diastolic perfusion pressure — the aortic diastolic pressure
minus the ventricular pressure — and on the duration of diastole,
which shortens with tachycardia.
Coronary flow is strongly autoregulated and matched to demand by metabolic
vasodilatation.
The demand — the myocardial oxygen consumption — is determined chiefly by the heart
rate, the contractility, and the wall stress,
which by Laplace depends on the ventricular pressure and size.
So myocardial oxygen supply depends on the coronary blood flow — largely diastolic,
dependent on diastolic pressure and time and on autoregulation — and the oxygen
content, while demand depends on heart rate, contractility and wall stress;
ischaemia results when demand exceeds supply,
so anaesthetic management aims to preserve this balance — avoiding tachycardia and
hypotension and excessive wall stress.
Distinguish systolic and diastolic ventricular function.
Ventricular function has two components, the systolic and the diastolic,
which can be impaired independently, an important clinical distinction.
Systolic function is the ability of the ventricle to contract and eject — its pump
function during systole — reflected in the stroke volume and the ejection fraction,
and impaired when contractility falls, as in systolic heart failure,
where the ventricle ejects poorly with a reduced ejection fraction.
Diastolic function is the ability of the ventricle to relax and fill adequately at
a normal filling pressure during diastole. Relaxation is an active,
energy-requiring process — lusitropy — and the ventricle must also be compliant.
Diastolic dysfunction is impaired relaxation or a stiff, non-compliant ventricle,
so that filling requires a higher pressure,
causing the features of heart failure despite a preserved ejection fraction — heart
failure with preserved ejection fraction, common in the elderly and hypertensive.
So systolic function is the ability to contract and eject,
reflected in the ejection fraction and impaired in systolic failure,
while diastolic function is the ability to relax — actively — and fill at a normal
pressure, impaired when the ventricle is slow to relax or stiff;
the two can fail independently, diastolic dysfunction causing failure with a
preserved ejection fraction, a distinction important to assessment and management.
Describe the work and efficiency of the heart.
The heart performs work in pumping blood,
and considering this work and its efficiency illuminates its energetics and oxygen
consumption.
The external, or stroke, work of the ventricle is the work done in ejecting the
stroke volume against the arterial pressure — approximately the product of the
stroke volume and the mean arterial pressure — and is represented by the area
enclosed within the pressure-volume loop.
There is also internal work, expended in developing tension without ejection and in
the isovolumetric phases, which does not appear as external work but consumes
energy.
The total energy consumed is reflected in the myocardial oxygen consumption,
which correlates best with the pressure-volume area and is increased especially by
pressure work — a high afterload — more than by volume work, an important point:
ejecting against a high pressure is more oxygen-costly than ejecting a larger
volume at a normal pressure.
The efficiency of the heart — external work divided by energy consumed — is
relatively low, around twenty per cent.
So the heart's external work is the ejection of the stroke volume against the
arterial pressure, the area of the pressure-volume loop,
with additional internal work; its oxygen consumption correlates with the
pressure-volume area and is raised more by pressure work than volume work,
and its efficiency is low — explaining why a high afterload is particularly costly
to the ischaemic heart.
Describe the atrial pressure waves and their significance.
The pressure in the atria, and correspondingly in the great veins — visible as the
jugular venous pulse — shows a characteristic pattern of waves through the cardiac
cycle, which reflects atrial events and can reveal abnormalities.
There are three positive waves and two descents.
The a wave is produced by atrial contraction.
The c wave is a small deflection produced by the bulging of the closed
atrioventricular valve into the atrium at the start of ventricular contraction.
The v wave is produced by the filling of the atrium against the closed
atrioventricular valve during ventricular systole.
Between them, the x descent follows the a wave as the atrium relaxes,
and the y descent follows the v wave as the atrioventricular valve opens and the
atrium empties.
These waves are significant clinically: the a wave is lost in atrial fibrillation,
where there is no coordinated atrial contraction,
and becomes large — a cannon wave — when the atrium contracts against a closed
valve, as in complete heart block.
So the atrial and jugular venous pressure shows the a wave of atrial contraction,
the c wave of valve bulging, and the v wave of atrial filling,
with the x and y descents; their pattern reflects atrial events and reveals
abnormalities such as the loss of the a wave in atrial fibrillation and cannon
waves in heart block.
Describe the third and fourth heart sounds and what murmurs represent.
Beyond the first and second heart sounds of valve closure,
additional sounds and murmurs may occur,
reflecting cardiac events and abnormalities.
The third heart sound is a low-pitched sound early in diastole,
produced by the rapid filling of the ventricle;
it can be normal in the young but in others suggests a dilated,
failing or volume-overloaded ventricle.
The fourth heart sound is a late-diastolic sound, just before the first,
produced by atrial contraction forcing blood into a stiff, non-compliant ventricle;
it suggests reduced ventricular compliance, as in hypertrophy.
Murmurs are sounds produced by turbulent blood flow,
in contrast to the normal silent laminar flow;
turbulence arises with high flow rates,
flow across a narrowed valve — a stenosis — or backward flow through an incompetent
valve — a regurgitation.
The timing, character and location of a murmur indicate its origin.
So the third heart sound reflects rapid ventricular filling,
normal in the young but suggesting failure or overload otherwise,
and the fourth reflects atrial contraction against a stiff ventricle;
murmurs are the sound of turbulent flow, from high flow,
stenosis or regurgitation — additional sounds that inform the clinical assessment
of the heart.
How does the heart respond to acute changes in load — the intrinsic regulatory
mechanisms?
The heart possesses intrinsic mechanisms, independent of nerves and hormones,
that allow it to adjust its performance to acute changes in load,
complementing Frank-Starling's law.
The first and principal is the Frank-Starling mechanism itself:
an acute increase in venous return and so preload stretches the ventricle,
increasing the force of contraction and the stroke volume to match the increased
return — the heterometric regulation, depending on a change in fibre length.
The second is the Anrep effect: an acute increase in afterload produces,
after a few beats, an increase in contractility,
helping the ventricle to maintain its output against the higher load — a
homeometric regulation, not depending on length.
The third is the Bowditch effect, or treppe:
an increase in heart rate itself increases contractility,
because the more frequent action potentials raise the intracellular calcium — the
force-frequency relationship.
So the heart adjusts to acute changes in load by intrinsic mechanisms:
the Frank-Starling mechanism increasing force with stretch to match venous return,
the Anrep effect raising contractility in response to increased afterload,
and the Bowditch effect or treppe raising contractility with increased rate —
intrinsic regulations that stabilise cardiac performance before and alongside the
autonomic responses.
How does the pericardium influence cardiac function?
The pericardium is the fibrous sac enclosing the heart,
and although the heart functions without it, it influences cardiac mechanics,
particularly when diseased.
The normal pericardium is relatively stiff and only slowly distensible,
containing a small amount of lubricating fluid.
Its effects are several: it limits acute over-distension of the heart,
contributes to the diastolic interaction between the chambers — ventricular
interdependence, whereby filling of one ventricle affects the other through the
shared septum and the constraining sac — and holds the heart in position.
Its importance is greatest in disease.
In cardiac tamponade, fluid accumulating in the pericardial space raises the
pressure around the heart, compressing the chambers and impairing their filling in
diastole; because the stiff pericardium cannot accommodate the fluid acutely,
even a modest rapid accumulation can be life-threatening, reducing filling,
stroke volume and cardiac output, with characteristic signs.
Constrictive pericarditis similarly impairs filling.
So the pericardium limits acute cardiac distension,
mediates ventricular interdependence and positions the heart;
its clinical importance lies in disease — cardiac tamponade,
where pericardial fluid compresses the heart and impairs diastolic filling,
reducing cardiac output, a potentially fatal condition demanding recognition and
relief.
Summarise how the heart functions as an efficient, regulated pump.
I would draw it together around the heart as a pump whose every property serves
effective, regulated, lifelong performance.
Its syncytial, striated muscle, coupled by intercalated discs and excited by the
calcium-plateau action potential, contracts forcefully and in a coordinated way,
the long refractory period ensuring relaxation and filling between beats.
The cardiac cycle of isovolumetric contraction, ejection, relaxation and filling,
driven by pressure changes and the valves, ejects the stroke volume each beat.
The output is regulated by preload, afterload and contractility,
displayed on the pressure-volume loop,
and adjusted by the intrinsic Frank-Starling,
Anrep and Bowditch mechanisms and by autonomic control.
Its high, continuous oxygen demand is met by an efficient,
largely diastolic coronary supply matched to demand,
leaving it vulnerable to ischaemia. Both its systolic ejection and diastolic
filling must be effective.
So the heart functions as an efficient,
regulated pump through its coordinated syncytial contraction,
its valve-defined cycle ejecting the stroke volume, its regulation by preload,
afterload, contractility and the intrinsic mechanisms,
and its demand-matched coronary supply — an integrated design whose understanding
underlies the management of the heart in anaesthesia.
Explain the cellular basis of the Frank-Starling mechanism.
The Frank-Starling mechanism — that the heart pumps more forcefully when filled
more — has, at the cellular level, an elegant basis in the length-dependence of the
cardiac muscle's force generation.
As the ventricle fills more, its muscle fibres are stretched to a greater resting
length, and this increased sarcomere length increases the force the fibre then
generates on contraction. Two factors explain this.
First, stretching towards an optimal sarcomere length improves the overlap of the
actin and myosin filaments, allowing more cross-bridges to form.
More important in cardiac muscle, however, is length-dependent activation:
stretching increases the sensitivity of the contractile apparatus to calcium,
so that for a given calcium release more force is produced;
the protein titin is thought to mediate this.
The cardiac muscle normally operates below its optimal length,
so it is on the ascending part of its length-tension curve,
where more stretch means more force.
So the Frank-Starling mechanism arises because stretching the cardiac fibre
increases its force of contraction, through improved filament overlap and, chiefly,
an increased calcium sensitivity of the myofilaments with length — length-dependent
activation mediated by titin — the cellular basis of the heart matching its output
to its filling.
What is the ejection fraction and what is its significance?
The ejection fraction is the proportion of the blood in the ventricle at the end of
filling that is ejected with each beat,
and it is a widely used index of the heart's systolic, or pump, function.
It is defined as the stroke volume — the volume ejected — divided by the
end-diastolic volume — the volume present at the end of filling, before ejection.
A normal value is around sixty to sixty-five per cent,
so that the heart ejects about two-thirds of its contents and a substantial reserve
volume remains.
Its significance is as a measure of contractile function:
a reduced ejection fraction indicates impaired systolic function, as in a dilated,
failing heart, and it is used to classify heart failure into that with reduced and
that with preserved ejection fraction, to guide treatment, and to assess prognosis.
It is, however, influenced by loading conditions, not contractility alone.
So the ejection fraction is the stroke volume as a fraction of the end-diastolic
volume, normally about sixty per cent;
it is a key clinical index of systolic function,
reduced in systolic heart failure and used to classify and prognosticate,
though it is load-dependent and not a pure measure of contractility.
Describe the mechanics of the cardiac valves and the consequences of their
dysfunction.
The four cardiac valves ensure the one-way flow of blood through the heart,
opening and closing passively in response to the pressure differences across them,
and their dysfunction loads the heart in characteristic ways.
The atrioventricular valves — mitral and tricuspid — open when atrial pressure
exceeds ventricular and close when the ventricle contracts,
their closure preventing backflow and supported by the chordae tendineae and
papillary muscles.
The semilunar valves — aortic and pulmonary — open when the ventricle's pressure
exceeds that in the great artery and close when it falls, preventing regurgitation.
Dysfunction takes two forms.
Stenosis, a narrowed valve, obstructs forward flow,
so the chamber behind it must generate a higher pressure,
causing pressure overload and hypertrophy — as in aortic stenosis,
loading the left ventricle.
Regurgitation, an incompetent valve, allows backflow,
so the chamber must handle an extra volume, causing volume overload and dilatation.
So the cardiac valves open and close passively with pressure differences to ensure
one-way flow; stenosis obstructs flow and causes pressure overload and hypertrophy,
while regurgitation permits backflow and causes volume overload and dilatation —
valve dysfunction loading the heart in ways of major anaesthetic importance.
Describe cardiac troponin and its role as a biomarker.
Troponin has a dual importance: as a regulatory protein essential to contraction,
and as the biomarker of choice for myocardial injury.
Physiologically, the troponin complex sits on the actin filament and regulates
contraction: when calcium binds troponin C,
the complex moves tropomyosin aside to expose the binding sites for the myosin
cross-bridges, initiating contraction;
the cardiac forms of troponin I and troponin T are specific to heart muscle.
This cardiac specificity underlies its clinical use.
When cardiac muscle cells are damaged and their membranes lose integrity — most
importantly in myocardial infarction — troponin is released into the blood,
where it can be measured by sensitive assays;
a rise and fall in the cardiac troponin is the biochemical hallmark of myocardial
injury and is central to the diagnosis of myocardial infarction.
It is, however, raised in other causes of myocardial injury,
so it must be interpreted in context.
So troponin is both the calcium-sensing regulator that, on binding calcium,
exposes the actin sites to initiate contraction,
and — because its cardiac forms are heart-specific — the key biomarker of
myocardial injury, released on cell damage and central to diagnosing myocardial
infarction, though raised in other myocardial injury too.
Describe the beta-adrenergic signalling that increases contractility in the myocyte.
The increase in contractility produced by sympathetic stimulation and
catecholamines is achieved through a well-defined signalling cascade within the
myocyte, which increases the calcium available to the contractile machinery.
Noradrenaline or adrenaline binds the beta-one adrenoceptor on the cell membrane;
this is coupled, through a stimulatory G-protein, to the enzyme adenylyl cyclase,
which generates the second messenger cyclic adenosine monophosphate;
this in turn activates protein kinase A.
The activated kinase then phosphorylates several targets to enhance contraction:
the L-type calcium channels, increasing calcium entry during the plateau;
phospholamban, which speeds the uptake of calcium back into the sarcoplasmic
reticulum, both relaxing the cell faster and loading more calcium for the next
beat; and the contractile proteins.
The net effect is more forceful contraction — a positive inotropic effect — and
faster relaxation — a positive lusitropic effect.
So beta-adrenergic stimulation increases contractility through the beta-one
receptor, the stimulatory G-protein, adenylyl cyclase,
cyclic adenosine monophosphate and protein kinase A,
which phosphorylates the calcium channels and phospholamban to increase and speed
calcium handling — the molecular basis of the inotropic and lusitropic effects of
sympathetic stimulation and of inotropic drugs.
Describe the force-frequency relationship.
The force-frequency relationship describes how the force of cardiac contraction
depends on the heart rate, an intrinsic property by which the heart contracts more
forcefully when it beats faster, also called the Bowditch effect or the treppe,
or staircase, phenomenon.
As the frequency of stimulation increases,
the force developed by each contraction increases, up to an optimum.
The mechanism is the handling of calcium: at higher rates,
calcium enters the cell more frequently through the calcium channels and the
sodium-calcium exchanger has less time to extrude it between beats,
so calcium accumulates within the cell and in the sarcoplasmic reticulum,
increasing the calcium available for each contraction and so the force.
This is a genuinely intrinsic mechanism, independent of nerves,
contributing to the increased contractility that accompanies the tachycardia of
exercise. In the failing heart, this relationship may be blunted or even reversed.
So the force-frequency relationship is the intrinsic increase in contractile force
with increasing heart rate — the Bowditch staircase — arising because faster rates
load the cell with calcium; it contributes to the increased contractility of
exercise and is blunted in heart failure,
an intrinsic complement to neural control of the heart.
Compare the right and left ventricles.
The two ventricles, though they eject the same stroke volume in series,
are strikingly different in structure and function,
suited to the very different circulations they supply.
The left ventricle pumps into the high-pressure systemic circulation,
so it is thick-walled, with a roughly cylindrical, conical shape,
generating high pressures — a pressure pump well suited to ejecting against a high
afterload.
The right ventricle pumps into the low-pressure,
low-resistance pulmonary circulation, so it is thin-walled,
with a crescentic shape wrapped around the septum,
generating much lower pressures — it is well suited to handling volume but is
poorly tolerant of a high afterload,
failing readily if the pulmonary pressure rises acutely.
The two share the interventricular septum and are enclosed together,
so they interact — ventricular interdependence.
So the left ventricle is a thick-walled,
high-pressure pump suited to the high-resistance systemic circulation,
while the right is a thin-walled, crescentic volume pump suited to the low-pressure
pulmonary circulation but intolerant of a raised afterload;
their differing structure reflecting their differing loads,
with implications for how each fails.
Describe the effects of anaesthetic agents on myocardial contractility.
Many anaesthetic agents affect myocardial contractility,
an important consideration since this contributes to their cardiovascular effects.
The volatile anaesthetic agents are, to varying degrees,
direct myocardial depressants: they reduce contractility,
chiefly by interfering with the intracellular handling of calcium — reducing its
entry and its availability to the contractile proteins — so they tend to reduce
cardiac output and blood pressure, an effect that is dose-dependent and more marked
in the already compromised heart.
Among the intravenous induction agents,
most — such as propofol — cause some cardiovascular depression,
partly through effects on the vasculature and partly direct,
whereas certain agents, notably ketamine,
tend to support the circulation indirectly through sympathetic stimulation,
though they are direct depressants if that is blocked or exhausted.
Many other drugs used — such as the beta-blockers and calcium-channel blockers —
reduce contractility by design.
So the anaesthetic agents variously affect contractility:
the volatile agents are dose-dependent direct myocardial depressants acting through
calcium handling, most intravenous agents cause some depression while ketamine
tends to support the circulation through sympathetic activation,
and many cardiovascular drugs reduce contractility by design — effects central to
the haemodynamic management of anaesthesia.
Describe the differences in the cardiovascular system at the extremes of age.
The heart and circulation differ importantly in the neonate and in the elderly,
with anaesthetic consequences.
The neonatal heart is immature: its myocardium has fewer contractile elements and
less organised calcium-handling machinery,
so it is less contractile and less able to increase its stroke volume,
making the neonate's cardiac output more dependent on heart rate — bradycardia is
poorly tolerated; the ventricles are also stiffer and the sympathetic innervation
immature.
The transitional circulation at birth, with the closure of the fetal shunts,
is also relevant.
The elderly heart and vessels show the changes of ageing:
the large arteries stiffen, raising the systolic pressure and the afterload and
causing left ventricular hypertrophy;
the maximum heart rate and the responsiveness to beta-adrenergic stimulation
decline, reducing cardiac reserve; and diastolic filling becomes more dependent on
atrial contraction, so atrial fibrillation is poorly tolerated.
So the neonatal heart is less contractile and rate-dependent with immature calcium
handling, while the ageing cardiovascular system shows arterial stiffening with
hypertrophy, reduced heart-rate reserve and beta-responsiveness,
and greater dependence on atrial filling — both extremes having reduced reserve and
specific anaesthetic implications.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Cardiac muscle is striated (sliding-filament contraction) but made of
single-nucleate branched cells joined by intercalated discs — desmosomes
transmitting force and gap junctions electrically coupling the cells into a
functional syncytium — and is rich in mitochondria for continuous aerobic work.
Second, The ventricular action potential has a fast sodium upstroke (phase 0),
brief partial repolarisation (1), a prolonged calcium-dependent plateau (2),
potassium-driven repolarisation (3) and a stable resting phase (4);
the long plateau/refractory period prevents tetany,
ensuring relaxation and filling between beats.
Third, Excitation-contraction coupling is by calcium-induced calcium release:
calcium entering through L-type channels during the plateau triggers a larger
release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum via ryanodine receptors — making force
dependent on extracellular calcium and gradable.
Fourth, The cardiac cycle is isovolumetric contraction → ejection → isovolumetric
relaxation → filling, defined by valve events (AV-valve closure = first heart
sound; aortic-valve closure = second heart sound and dicrotic notch);
the pressure-volume loop (pressure vs volume,
traversed anticlockwise) has a width equal to the stroke volume.
Fifth, On the pressure-volume loop, preload is the end-diastolic volume,
afterload the pressure at which ejection begins,
and contractility the slope of the end-systolic pressure-volume relationship;
anaesthetic agents (volatiles, propofol) depress contractility and the high
myocardial oxygen demand makes the heart vulnerable to perioperative ischaemia.
Thank you. That concludes the station.